Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Costas Karaki. He is author and
editor of several books on science. He works at
the teacher training institute and the section of Biology
at the University of Geneva. And today we're focusing
on his latest book, Ancestry Reimagined, Dismantling the Myth
of Genetic Ethnicity. So, Doctor Kore is welcome to
the show. It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much. I'm delighted to be here.
Thank you for the invitation.
So to get into the book, then you talk
a lot about uh information that people can get
from DNA ancestry testing and how they interpret it.
So, first of all, what is DNA ancestry testing
and what are some of the main technologies out
there available?
Yeah. So DNA ancestry testing is similar to the
DNA testing we do for health. Uh It is
about uh sequencing our DNA and finding specific uh
markers which are considered to be related to our
ancestry. So there are a number of issues with
this uh which I'm sure we're going to discuss.
But overall, the idea is that we can make
inferences about our ancestry based on our, on the
sequencing of our DNA.
And uh I mean, perhaps relevant to the topic
here. What are some of the most common misconceptions
that people have about how DNA works? And uh
that people tend to attach to these tests.
Well, the biggest misconception is that these are ancestry
tests because they have almost nothing to do with
ancestry and our ancestors. Um What these tests do
is to identify similarities that our DNA has to
particular reference groups. Uh The selection of which is
a big story. But overall what the test can
show is that we share some recent common ancestors
with some of these people. So in fact, what
the test can tell us is that there may
be relatives, close relatives in some place, especially when
the database is large or that we are more
similar to one reference group rather than to another.
So what kinds of information can we really get
from DNA sequencing?
Uh FROM DNA sequencing in general, we can have
uh we can have our own DNA sequence, uh
you know, an individual's DNA sequence and compare it
to other individuals or to a whole group or
to a consumption sequence. Uh And all we can
really find out figure out our similarities and differences.
Now, when it comes to health, for instance, we
can find whether we have a specific uh single
nucleotide polymorphism or S MP that may be related
to some disease. This is a probabilistic issue. When
it comes to ancestry, we may or may not
have uh what usually is called ancestry formative markers,
which are markers that are more often found in
one group rather than another. The big issue is
which these markers are, which are not exclusive to
any group that are just more frequent to one
group or another. And what exactly we infer from
this about our ancestry.
So when people have take these tests, how do
they usually react to and deal with the information
they get from them?
Ok. Now, that's a big problem. Uh Many people
take this test for fun because someone gifted make
a, made a gift, you know, in Christmas or
uh at another time without really uh considering which
the consequences might be. Now, the biggest problem is
that once someone takes a test, uh the DNA
information, the DNA sequences that this person has is
made available for purposes that uh he she may
not agree uh with, for instance, using medical research.
Another issue is that, and that's the most uh
ugly surprise that people have uh realize that, you
know, the person that uh one has considered as
he's, her father is not uh really that because
uh we have several false paternity cases that are
revealed by the tests and this is a bad
surprise for many people. Now, the actual uh very
good thing that these tests can do which is
good for those interested in, that is to identify
and know relatives. And this can be very useful
for people who do not know much about their
ancestry. For instance, in my case, I know my
grandparents, I came to meet three of my eight
great grandparents and I know a lot about my
recent history. So I have no concerns but there
are other people who may not know for whatever
reason uh much about their history. So what happens
is that by uploading their sequence on databases and
identifying an and relatives, they may not know, they
may not have known before. This is a way
to find more about uh their ancestry. So this
is why in the book, in the end I
say that actually this is DNA family testing and
not ancestry testing.
Mhm OK. So I'm about to ask you what
ancestry means and then I know that people who,
I mean sell those tests and give out that
information, use terms like ethnicity, race, nationality. We we're
also going to discuss those terms but more generally,
what is a social group? What does that mean?
And particularly from a genetics perspective?
OK. So a social group is a group to
which we may belong, which can be anything, it
can be, you know, a group of uh students,
it can be um you know, those who follow
a football club or whatever. But of course, there
are some social groups which are more important and
relate more closely to our identity. Nationality is the
first one that comes to mind because it's official,
we all have official documents uh for whatever reason,
uh this changes from one country to another. But
uh this is uh uh an important part of
our identity, uh our nationality because it defines who
we are and it is confirmed by the official
documents, you know, passports, identity cards that we have
uh related to, that is ethnicity that has to
do mostly with culture, sometimes with descent. And this
is sometimes quite close to nationality. Other times it
is not, for instance, in my, in my case,
uh when it comes to Greek nationality and what
we call Greek ethnicity, these are two things that
go together. Well, because uh Greece is a very
peculiar case with a peculiar language and the specific
history in a specific geographical area. Of course, there
are Greeks, Greeks that live all over the world.
But uh this is something that is usually localized
geographically and specified culturally, as I said with where
uh the group usually lives if it is, if
it lives in one place because some of groups
are dispersed and what with other cultural characteristics they
have with respect to mo most importantly, with respect
to language. Now, race is something that is broader
usually. Um IT has to do with uh uh
continental groups in relation to specific continental groups. So
in the sense that a racial group may uh
include various ethnicities and it is usually related to
specific biological markers, uh biological characteristics such as skin
color. But this does not mean in any way
that race is a biological, biologically defined group because
we may identify, you know, an African and Asian
and European from their skin color or other features.
But this does not mean in any way that
all Africans, all Asians or all Europeans have exactly
the same features. It is just that we have
some averages that may differ. But in fact, when
it comes to phenotypic variation, the, the features that
we all have, there's a big continuum in all
of these
a and what does ancestry mean exactly
what you mean, what ancestry means more broadly. So,
you know, uh first of all, there's not one
kind of ancestry, we may talk about genealogical ancestry,
we may talk about genetic ancestry. We may talk
about cultural ancestry. We may talk about geographical ancestry.
Overall ancestry have to do with where we come
from. Uh CULTURAL ancestry has to do with the
culture we belong to. And geographical ancestry has to
do with uh the places we come from or
uh our, our parents came from. But the two
most important ones which are usually confused are genealogical
and genetic ancestry. Genealogical ancestry has to do with
our pedigree, our family tree who our parents were,
who are grandparents, great grandparents. And so on were,
whereas genetic ancestry has to do with uh specific
uh segments of DNA and their origin. So we
get half of our DNA from each of our
parents on average 1/4 25% from each of our
grandparents. Uh 18 from each one of our great
grandparents. And so on, this has an important implication.
Whereas we have two parents, four grandparents, eight grandparents,
16 in the next generation and so on. And
the number of our ancestors increases exponentially because in
each generation, only half of the DNA on average
goes to the next one, we get less and
less of uh DNA from our more remote ancestors.
So after 10 gen 10 generations, if you make
the calculations, there will be ancestors from whom we
will have inherited no DNA at all. And this
is the confusing part these ancestors have existed. But
because of how biology works, because of how uh
DNA is transmitted from one generation to another. And
some are combinations that take place in the formation
of the reproductive cells, we end up receiving segments
which becomes smaller and smaller. The further back in
time our ancestors were. So this is the problem
with ancestry tests because in fact, they cannot tell
much about our more remote ancestors. They can tell
a lot about our recent ancestors from whom we
have received, received inherited many and large segments.
So you've already given us an overview of uh
ethnicity, race. And nationality. But let me ask you
more specifically about race because this uh particularly in
some contexts, tends to be a very pernicious term
because of the things people like attached to the
term race. So what are some of the claims
made by race scientists? And are some of them
based on what the, the information they can get
from these DNA tests?
Yeah. Uh MOST geneticists today would say that there
is no biological basis when it comes to race.
And this does not mean that races do not
have differences in biological features. But this is a
different thing. The fact that we can make inferences
from some biological features about a person's race does
not mean that these features define this person race.
So race is mostly cultural, socially constructed and there
are different philosophical views about this, even though we
can find some features which are highly associated with
specific races. The most known one is um uh
skin color. Now, the big problem is that because
of how this concept was treated in the 19th
century, we ended up with stereotypes that do harm
still today. So what was the issue during the
19th century European countries had colonized most of the
world and to make uh use and exploit what
they had there. They had to use people for
labor, for work, uh whom they usually treated as
slaves. But these were humans and the mostly Christian
European countries had issues about how to deal with
that. So a solution was found by naturalists of
the time who started arguing that these people, the
Aborigines who lived uh in Africa, Oceania or elsewhere,
the non Europeans were not exactly at the same
level with Europeans and we who are usually white
people, they were inferior. And this was a quite
silly justification of the exploitation. So, whereas it was
not acceptable to exploit humans, once the science in
quotation marks of, of, of the time argued that
these, these were inferior, there was a justification for
this exploitation. And this had, this has to do,
this had to do with many different kinds of
groups. And the idea persisted up to the 20th
century. And unfortunately, uh took its extreme path with
the holocaust and the persecution of the Jews by
the Nazis uh in terms of ancestry groups, if
of course, we accept that the being Jews is
an issue of ancestry, not an issue of religion.
So uh there were also, there was also discrimination
in the United States and elsewhere with respect to
African Americans and European Americans, we will justify it
in this way. And people insisted that there were
big and important differences about these various racial groups.
Mhm This we know today that is not at
all uh true and accurate. In fact, the genetic
variation that we find in Africa is much higher
than the genetic variation everywhere else in the world.
Just because all of us who live outside Africa
have evolved, are descended from a very small portion
of that, uh, African variation because we are descendants
of those people who at some point, uh, some
40 50,000 years or 60,000 years ago or earlier
left Africa and moved elsewhere.
And on the topic of ethnicity, I mean, the
way people use these terms is sometimes a bit
confusing because they overlap a little bit. Isn't there
somewhat of a close relationship or connection between race
and ethnicity in the way that people think and
talk about this term?
Yeah, actually, in some cases, they used as synonyms.
Uh uh THEY'RE talking about in some uh kinds
of sensors, they talk about racial slash ethnic groups,
but actually, they're quite different exactly because race is
usually correlated associated with biological markers. Whereas ethnicity is
usually associated with culture plus race is uh with
race. We also, we usually make reference to continental
groups whereas with ethnicity, we usually make reference to
more local geographical populations. So we could say for
instance that in Europe, we are all Europeans, uh
we are white, not all but you know, uh
many people are white uh and European and then
we might identify specific ethnic groups like, you know,
Portuguese, Spanish, Greek or whatever, which may uh be
uh correlated with nationality. But also this is not
something obligatory. This is why the these groups are
are usually confused. But the, the key point I
argue for in my book is that none of
this has to do anything with biology because there's
no way that DNA defines whether one is, you
know, Greek, Portuguese, Spanish, Chinese or whatever.
So, isn't there a sort of underlying essentialism attached
to all of these terms like race, ethnicity and
even nationality? And if so, what kind of essentialism
exactly? Is it biological, essentialism or also essentialism of
other kinds?
Well, the big problem is that there is, of
course, essentialism about social groups, which is something that
is very intuitive. This is psychological essentialism that comes
to us naturally because it makes us feel that
we understand what is happening with um uh other
groups and our to the other and the group
to which we belong. Now, first of all, we
all need to belong to a group, whatever that
group is, it could be, you know, football club,
it could be our nation, it could be whatever.
And of course, belonging to a nation is very
important because this provides stability security to people and
they know where to what they they are attached.
But this does not in any way indicate anything
about the people belonging to a social group. What
whether it is, this is racial, ethnic or national
nation, we feel the need to make these distinctions
because when we identify with a group, uh our
own group, the in group as psychologists call it
this increase the cohesion of the group because we
know who our compatriots are and we feel, you
know, more comfortable with them. And at the same
time, this increases our distinction between our own group
and other groups. This is a psychological need. And
this is based on the idea that there is
something common among ourselves, our in group and something
very different with the people from our groups. There's
no problem with that in principle because, you know,
cultural differences exist and groups can be different. However,
the problem begins when we are looking for a
deeper sense that characterizes this group, which is very
easily intuitively identified with DNA. This is then when
we come to say that uh look, I'm, you
know, Greek or Portuguese or Spanish or whatever because
I this is in my DNA and there is
no way that an immigrant can become Greek uh
or Spanish or Portuguese because he she does not
have his DNA. And this is problematic because this
gives grounds to people who argue about nativism and
being natives in their country against those who are
immigrants, even though these immigrants can be well adapted
and well assimilated in the community. And this can
uh also uh reinforce uh racism among those people
who consider other racial groups different or inferior. And
sadly, there have been several mass shootings in the
US in which the perpetrators cited scientific research to
justify the differences between themselves and their victims. So,
the big problem with essentialism is that we have
the tendency to centralize social groups. And when these
essences are found in DNA, they are not, but
we consider them to be there, then it is
easy to naturalize our belonging to a social group
and consider other people as more different than we
are. And this is problematic because actually, if you,
when we look at our DNA, the similarities that
we find among any one of us are many
more than our differences. Mhm
uh I mean, and what do people who create
these DNA tests and provide this information to users
actually mean, where do they get the information that
particular genes or sets of genes come from a
particular group of people, a particular region of the
globe? I mean, does it make sense to talk
about genes that way as being from these or
that place or from this or that? Uh
PEOPLE uh First of all, they don't only talk
about genes, they may talk about various sites on
DNA which are even found outside genes. Now, it
all begins with population genetic research, population geneticist, arbitrary
and they are clear about that, define populations in
order to make comparisons and selectively, they look at
the very small part of the differences because this
is what they're interested in and they may find
one or another SNP or gene uh more frequent
in one or another place. And by identifying sometimes
clients gradations of the these frequencies, they can make
inferences about migration movements and things like that always
in com in um a a complementary way, complementary
way with the data evidence from archaeology, history and
other disciplines. Now, uh what they used to do
in the past was to um assign uh specific
individuals to specific groups when their four grandparents all
came from a single place. For instance, in my
case, knowing that my four grandparents were born and
lived in Greece and I was also born and
lived most of my life. Uh IN Greece, I
would be assigned to the Greek group. Uh But
this is a bit arbitrary because I have no
idea what happened three or four or five generations
before my grandparents. Nevertheless, this arbitrariness is accepted because
they need to have a criterion of grouping. And
there is no problem in so far as this
is explained, the DNA ancestry companies use more or
less the same uh principle and they assign people
to groups. And now the problem is that to
describe these groups, both the scientists in the past,
but they have now changed that. And the ancestry
companies still today used the names, the denominations uh
related to ethnic groups. And this has created the
confusion. These ethnic groups are usually located in specific
places geographically and they found that as a useful
descriptor. But it is exactly this has cons confusion
and this is a thing to be avoided. Now,
what does this mean? The tests can only show
whether we are more similar or less similar always
probabilistically to one or another reference group. How these
groups have been made is a big story. And
it is interesting that the big companies like 23
and me and ancestry, they explain all these limitations
and all these parameters in their white papers. The
question is how many of the customers who buy
the test actually take the time to read these
white papers and understand the limitations. And uh when
we also consider the um uh the probability to
be correctly assigned, there are some threshold levels. And
when these levels go up, what uh assignments can
be made are usually only at the continental level,
which perhaps we can already make by looking at
each other. There's no need to take a genetic
test. Otherwise, when we go to more uh local
levels, there are limitations and there are these are
probabilistic estimates which may not be accurate and they
just offer to customers the most likely results. And
the most interesting part then is that these results
change across time. People who took a test 10
years ago would have different results today because the
reference groups have been enriched and changing and the
companies have been going to find the levels of
detail. And as a result, there have been changes
in the assignments that they make.
So does it make sense then to say that
anyone is X percent A nationality. Y percent, an
ethnicity. Z percent another, uh, nationality. Because that's, uh,
the way I, I mean, a, actually, to be
honest, I've never took myself one of those tests.
So, but, uh, look, uh, on the internet and
even people that I know personally who took those
tests, the way they, uh, present the information when
talking with other people is always that way. Z
this Y, that x uh, that over there. So,
but does it make sense to present and analyze
genetic data in that way?
Uh Absolutely not. And that's what I explained in
the book. What it makes sense is to tell
people that look, we have reference groups, ABC D,
et cetera and you are, were found to be
more closely related, have more similarities in your DNA
sequence with that. And the other group, uh This
means perhaps that with these people, it is more
likely to have had common ancestors in the recent
past, but this has nothing to do with nationality
and ethnicity. So, what the company should be doing
is as scientists have been doing recently, drop, forget
altogether about uh um names relating to national, racial
or other social groups and just saying that look,
we have, for instance, the UK ban or we
have another bio banks in other places. We have
uh a data from specific places and this or
the other person were found to be more similar
to that or the other bio bank which means
that it is more likely that there are common
ancestors with that group rather than the other. When
we do that. This makes sense because all we
say is that probabilistically somewhere is more closely related
to some people than to another, which makes sense.
But this has not uh does not have anything
to do with national ethnic or racial groups. Now,
attention there may be a correlated associated by coincidence
uh but it doesn't have to be. So that's
the issue. There will likely be a correlation with,
you know, an ethnic group when we're talking about
a genetic test. So the genetic test can be
an indicator for someone belock in a specific group,
but it may not so not be. And this
is why we should not confuse uh what are
the indicators of ethnicity or race with the criteria
for belonging to ethnicity or race. But unfortunately, people
take them exactly in the opposite way when the
tests tell them that you are X percent that
or y percent that they tend to forget what
they know about their family history and believe that
since DNA says that it must be correct, but
it doesn't have to be the case.
Mhm So uh the next question, this is something
that I think you've already, at least in part
touched on when earlier I asked you uh how
people determine that a particular gene or set of
genes come from this or that area. Of the
global these or that people out there. Um BUT
apart from ethnicity, race, nationality, which seem to be
very, uh I mean, uh not very precise terms
and not very scientifically valid to think about things,
particularly from a genetics perspective. Do you think that
a term like population would make more sense? And
if so how would we need to define it
for it to be scientifically valued, particularly from a
genetics perspective,
even populations are arbitrarily defined and geneticists are very
clear about this. Uh But this is something that
is better to use uh with a specific reference
of what we're talking about. So for instance, we
might say that we went to England and we
sampled, you know, 2000 people from all over England.
And this gives us AAA group with a specific
name uh of people who have lived there for
some time or, you know, whose parents and grandparents
were born there. This does not have to do
anything with being English biologically or English identity or
whatever. It is just a specific sample that we
rely on. If we compare someone and find similarities
or differences with uh that group, we can say
that this person is closer to that group, uh
which could be, you know, a population, but we
should refrain from referring to identity. And now here
is the issue. If we compare people, for instance,
you know, uh living in Spain and Portugal, the
differences will not be many, there will be many
more differences if we can compare someone living in
Spain with someone living in China and someone living
uh in Portugal with someone in China. Exactly because
we have these clients, these gradations and these frequencies
change. But all of that is probabilistic and the
inferences that we can make uh should be very
cautious. And this is why I'm saying again that
we should forget about ancestry and just understand that
what the test tells us, tell can tell us
is, are about similarities in our DNA sequences with
specific groups or particular individuals. And this is the
important and the only value that the tests have
someone who doesn't know much about their past, they
can, they may be able to find relatives, close
or more distant ones, uh if they have uploaded,
of course, their own DNA on the database, you
know, get to meet them. And this is why
ma how many people have found, you know, unknown
relatives have siblings, uh lost fathers or whatever um
from uh from distance, but it is always about
similarity and it is relative. It doesn't have to
do with ancestry and ethnic identity and things like
that.
And earlier, when I asked you about race, you
mentioned very briefly the term decline. What is a
line? Exactly? Could you tell us a little bit
more about it?
So we may have a specific A and P
or specific genes in an area. And uh for
whatever reason, because, because, you know, the founder group
was there and they have this S and PS
very in high frequency and these have persisted because
there was no reason for the frequent uh to
change. And now if people have left this group,
you know, more people will live quite close, less
people, we will live a bit further and even
less people will, will live very far. So if
we study and do the proper sampling a along
the way, we will find the higher frequencies in,
in that in the initial place and the frequency
of the specific S and P becoming lower and
lower along the way. And this is how a
client is identified. Uh We have a diminishing frequency
of the particular S and P uh along geographical
distance. Now, if we do this for many S
and PS or genes, and we've used models to
represent this variation, it is possible to identify movements
along the geographical area. But this always, the interpretation
has to be cautious and always correlated related with,
you know, archaeological historical and other kinds of evidence.
Mhm So in your book, at a certain point,
you tell us that when it comes to retracing
history, it is important to understand the differences between
genetic ancestry and genealogical ancestry. So could you tell
us what those differences are, what each of those
terms mean and what limitations they impose in the
domain of retracing history.
This has to do with uh the con this
concept that I defined earlier. So as I said,
genealogical ancestry has to do with our ancestors in
our family tree. And these increase exponentially in every
generation 248, 16 and so on. And these are
actual people who have lived in the past. Um
Genetic ancestry has to do with the segments of
DNA we have inherited from these people. And there
are two issues in this inheritance. The first one
is that each parent transmits about 50% of his
hair DNA to their offspring. And the second is
that uh due to a process called crossing, crossing
over uh in the production of uh the reproductive
cells, uh specific chromosomes, homologous chromosomes exchange segments. So
for instance, a chromosome that I inherited from my
father does not have to be the respective chromosome.
Let's say chromosome one of my father does not
have to be the chromosome one of my paternal
grandfather or my paternal grandmother. But actually, it may
have combinations of both of these grand paternal chromosomes
in one exactly because of the combination. So this
process continues. And whereas we have received large segments
from our recent ancestors, we receive smaller and smaller
segments from our more remote ancestors. And as I
said earlier, the outcome is that we have not
received uh DNA, we may have not received DNA
from some of our remote ancestors who are not
represented in ourselves. So in this sense, and this
is what frustrates me sometimes when the test companies
say DNA can tell you who you really are,
it actually cannot because only a portion of our
genealogical ancestry is reflected represented in our genetic ancestry.
And that's the important thing to keep in mind.
So who we are depends on what we happen
to have inherited from our ancestors. And there is
so much information that we cannot see in our
own DNA. The other issue now is that as
we go further back in the past, and we
have an exponential increase of our ancestors imagine having
today. I don't know, 8 billion people, how many
billions of ancestors should have existed, you know, 1000
years ago. But this is not the case. And
the reason is simply that the ancestors that each
of us theoretically has had, are not different from
the ancestors of our people. It is just that
as we go back in the past, our pedigrees
become e inter twined and overlap and we have
uh the same ancestors. Now, this usually correlates with
geography and you know, a person who has been
born and grew up in a place is more
likely to have recent common ancestors with the people
living there than with people living elsewhere. But it
is all probabilistic. Now, the big confusion to conclude
is that we should clearly separate genealogical ancestry, who
our ancestors were with the portions of DNA. We
haven't heard it from them and DNA tests have
nothing to do. A nothing to say about genealogical
rate. They can only tell us about genetic ancestry.
The DNA we have inherited by some of our
ancestors and nothing to do with the rest of
the others from whom we may have received nothing.
Mhm uh
So I would like to just clarify one point
that you made briefly also earlier in one of
my other questions. What does it mean to say
that in terms of ancestry, we are all ultimately
African o of course, we know from paleoanthropology from
the best Africa we have that we as a
species, Homo sapiens originated in Africa. There's a debate
if it was in one single location or multiple
locations, but that's beside the point here. But uh
particularly genetically speaking, uh what does that mean that
we are also ultimately African?
It means that if we could trace the ancestry
of any one of us living today, tw 200,000
years back, we would find African ancestors, ancestors living
in Africa because this is where our species evolved
and this is where we come from. And this
is the key point with ancestry. So someone who
is perceived as European, they might have, you know,
people ancestors living in Europe say 40,000 uh years
ago or in different places more recently, depending on
how the ancestors moved. And the key point here
is that whether we are you know, imagine people
who arrived uh until the Americas and were the
ancestors of the people we today call native Americans.
These people would have different ancestors, you know, 1020
30 140,000 years ago, depending on where they, their
ancestors were found on specific time points. So the
key idea here is that ancestry is not something
that is absolute, but it is relative to time.
And if we specify the reference point in time
we're talking about, then we can define our ancestry
differently. So if that reference point was 200 years
ago, which is, you know, the beginning of our
species, all of us living today would have had
ancestors in Africa. And it is in the sense
that I write in the book that we're all
ultimately Africans. And this is confirmed not just by,
you know, the evolution of our species, but by
the fact that the more we study uh genomes
in Africa uh today, the more uh we find
genetic variation that is not, does not exist elsewhere.
Exactly because as I said, all those millions of
people who live outside Africa, all come from a
very small groups, very small groups of people who
at some point left Africa, those who stayed in
Africa, kept evolving and kept differentiating. And this is
because they have done this for more, they have
a larger genetic variation that we have.
Mhm And uh I mean, ultimately looking across different
human groups. And perhaps even, of course, we are
talking mostly about groups here, but even individual humans,
how much do humans and different human groups, even
the more distant ones, geographically and historically speaking, how
much do they actually differ genetically? Is there really
much distinction?
No, we know from many studies uh that have
taken place since 1972 by uh uh when we
had a landmark study by Rich and the findings
have more or less been confirmed ever since that,
about 10% of human DNA variation can be found
between continental groups. The remaining 90% perhaps more is
found within continental groups, which means that if we
take randomly four people from whatever place in the
world and compare them, we would not be able
to say who is who because all of them
uh would be on average 90% similar perhaps more.
Actually, if we compare randomly any two human genomes,
we find more than 99% similarity. Uh But of
course, this does not mean that there's no difference
because, you know, for with 3 billion base uh
in DNA, uh you know, 1% or less than
1% is still a lot. But on average, the
variation that we find is mostly found within continental
groups than between groups. And this is very important
to note.
And also, as you mentioned earlier, even when it
comes to this variation, we should think about it
as being continuous rather than clustered.
Yeah, of course. Now, in specific places, you know,
where there are geographical barriers uh or you know,
between the continents, we may find clusters, but it
depends both on the sampling and on the way
we classify things. So for instance, there was a
study that has been quite misused and abused uh
in which they let the clusters emerge uh on
their own. And when the number was five, they
found five clusters that roughly corresponded to the five
continents. But this was not the most probable result.
It just happened that with five clusters predefined in
the software to have something that corresponds coincides with
uh the continental variation that we have. But in
no way, as I said, was it the most
problem result? And if we kept creating clusters, we
would be finding more and more variation. So because
we know we have a long history of scientific
racism as I described in, in the 19th century.
And because we tend to stereotype races by looking
at how people look, we forget the uh amount
of, you know, variation that exists within its rate
and within this biological features and essentializing them makes
us misunderstand the variation and the continuity that exists
uh uh at the same time, you know, uh
skin color, for instance, doesn't say much because there
are about black people in Africa, but there are
also black people in India. So exactly who is
black and how what we define as black is
relevant. And in every continent, we will find many,
many different kinds of variations in skill color uh
or other features. So, the important thing to keep
in mind is that whenever we see clusters, they're
usually arbitrary. Because if we were able to map
all the genetic variation, we would see a continuity.
So there's a study, there was a recent study
in New York. Uh I have the graph in
the book with uh a very um uh diligent
sampling that shows overlaps among all kinds of groups.
Even though we see some people on one side
and some people on another side, there is always
a continuity among them and there are always overlaps.
So on average, we can separate groups, but we
should keep in mind that these are averages. Uh
AND think for instance, you know how we compare
people in terms of height. We say for instance,
in Europe, that Dutch people are on average taller
than other Europeans. But this doesn't mean that every
Dutch person is taller than everybody else. This is
the key point to, to keep in mind
and what do terms like the natural order mean?
Because that's also sometimes something that people refer to
a sort of natural order when thinking, for example,
in terms of re or, or even if they
do not refer to the term or do not
use the term directly, they are still thinking in
terms that would allude to a specific natural order.
What is, what do they mean by that? And
in what ways can it be problematic to think
in terms of there being a natural order for
different human groups out there?
WW. Well, there were racist people who think that
the natural order is that some groups are superior
to other groups, usually these are white Europeans who
are superior. But if there is any natural order,
in my view, this is that all humans are
related and notwithstanding the differences in appearance in DNA
sequences and everything, the similarities that we have are
many, many, many more than our differences. And in
my view, the only natural order that exists is
that all humans belong to the same species and
we are all relatives in some sense, we are
all related, of course, some are more distant than
others. But there's no way in which we can
distinguish among human groups in terms of uh significant
differences. It is just that by stereotyping, we may
arbitrarily select some like color and say that, you
know, uh Africans and Europeans are different in terms
of color. But this is just one feature. The
similarities underlying are found underneath are many, many more
and there's no reason to privilege one feature just
because we see it and think it is very
important. Imagine for instance, if I may add, you
know, that we decided not to separate people by
the color of their skin but by the color
of their eyes, how, how confusing this would be
arbitrarily, we can make any such decision. But we
know that at the deeper level, uh we are
very, very, very much related than we usually think.
And what would you say are perhaps some of
the most negative social consequences that something like genetic
essentialism has?
Well, the problem is that if we think that,
you know, people living in a specific area belonging
to specific ethnic group, speaking a specific language uh
that this is something due to their DNA, they
may treat people from other places as different as
belonging to other groups. And this all leads to
a divided society and to a contract with a
contrast between us and them. Now, I'm not saying
that people living in an area should be uh
you know, open to anyone coming because I believe
being an immigrant myself, that people when they leave
and go to another country, they have to uh
adapt and respect uh the places they live and
be assimilated in society and be integrated in society
properly. But this has nothing to do with the
DNA. It is cultural social. And so I I
the problem is that we try to explain the
integration problems that some people have due to their
race or ethnic group or their DNA, even though
this is irrelevant because there are, you know, immigrants
in various places who are well integrated and people
from the very same place who are not well
integrated. And the key issue here is that their
integration does, has anything to do with, has nothing
to do with race, ethnic group or DNA. It
has, it has to do with who these people
are. And this is why we should avoid stereotypes,
uh, in this way.
Mhm. And that is the other important thing to
keep in mind here. Right. That, uh, when people,
and that unfortunately is something very common when people,
uh derive conclusions about the particular behaviors or of
certain groups of people, sometimes they think in terms
of race or ethnicity, of course, based on their,
for example, in color, they assume that people who
are from particular origins, from particular social groups, races,
whatever that they tend to exhibit particular behaviors that
genes are, I mean, even though, of course, they
do not have directly direct access to their genes,
but they assume that they must be from a
particular race. So if these are that particular set
of genes that genes correlate directly to particular behaviors
and even sometimes that cultural differences they see between
groups are genetic in base, uh I mean, that
doesn't make much sense.
No, it doesn't. And you know, this is the
problem with stereotypes. So some Europeans might say, you
know, Greeks are lazy or Greeks are warm and
hospitable depending on the experience they have had. But
the truth is that not all Greeks are lazy,
not all Greeks work as much as they should.
Not, all Greeks are hospital, not all Greeks are
warm or cold. There is of course an average
but it has to do with the limited experiences
that each one of us has. And the big
problem is that usually we tend to generalize from,
you know, a very small sample of our instances
to what happens. Plus of course, there are historical
stereotypes that are maintained and it is easy to
explain them in terms of DNA. Because psychological essentialism
makes us find look for essences and you know,
DNA is the best place holder we could have
for this. So the key point here is for
us to look at individuals and avoid, avoid their
music and inferences based on the group, whatever that
group it is that they belong and whatever we
do, we should keep in mind that this has
nothing to do with the DNA.
Mhm. So let me ask you one last question.
Then we've been focusing a lot on some of
the negative effects that being exposed to this sort
of genetic information coming from DNA tests might have
on people individually and also socially. Do you think
that the idea of ancestry can also have sometimes
positive effects for people? And can that also come
from DNA testing or?
Well ancestry is important? And uh for instance, as
I I write in the conclusion of my book,
I consider myself Greek, why because I was born
in Greece. This is the place where my parents,
grandparents, great grandparents were born. As far as I
know, I speak the language of the people who
live there. I think in the same way with
the people live there. And this is my ancestry
and this is the culture I'm proud of. This
has nothing to do with my DNA. And I
don't need my DNA to confirm this in any
way because uh ancestry has to do with my
upbringing, has to do with my culture. Uh The
DNA could not confirm or discon confirm any of
this. Imagine I took a test and found the
test said that I belong to, I don't know
whatever group would this change who I am? No,
in no way, it wouldn't change the language I
speak and the language in which I think and
the traditions and the cultures I follow. So ancestry
is something very important. But we have to be
careful when we correlate it with our DNA. It
makes sense to think about DNA only when we
do not know much about ancestry. Because in this
case, by using DNA, we might find some relatives,
some people with whom we have recent common ancestors
and through them, it might be possible to learn
something about our past. But this should be done
with caution and we should not destroy in any
way what we know about ourselves. It is only
when we do not know much, but it can
be useful.
Uh And also, and this is a point that
we touched on earlier if people really correctly look
at genetic data and they interpret it correctly uh
as they can do. So, after learning from your
book, for example, the ancestry might also be a
ve a very positive uh term or, or concept
if people understand that we are all ultimately related
to one another.
Yeah. A actually, this is the the most uh
the single most important conclusion of this studies of
DNA, that the differences among humans are very few
than similarities at the level of DNA are so
many in the sense that we are all a
big family. And if there is one conclusion, it
should be that our species is very recent. Uh
It has evolved for a few 1000 years compared
to what has happened in other species and we
have not diverged much to be able to identify
the differences. Some people are looking for
great. So the book is again, ancestry reimagine dismantling,
dismantling the myth of genetic ethnicities. I'm leaving a
link to it in the description of the interview.
And Doctor Korra is uh uh before we go
apart from the book, would you also like to
tell people where they can find you and the
rest of your work on the internet?
Yeah. Well, I have a personal page with my
surname kuris.com where there are links to all my
books and my, my, my big interest and my
big aim is to help people understand science and
understand what science can and cannot tell them. And
unfortunately DNA ancestry testing can say a lot but
not what people usually think of. As I said
in the beginning, it's mostly about family and recent
uh and relatives with whom we have recent common
ancestors. The tests are very good at finding close
relatives, very, very good, but this does not necessarily
have to do much with our ancestry.
Great. So, Doctor Kuraki, thank you so much for
coming on the show. It's been a really informative
conversation. Thank you. So,
thank
you
very much for the invitation. I was delighted to
be here.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitten
bear, no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors Philip
Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and H her
meal and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes
Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends, David Sloan
Wilson. Ya de Ro Ro die, Jan Punter, Romani
Charlotte, Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi Nale
medicine, Gary G Alman, Sam Ofri and YPJ Barboa,
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca,
Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary FTD and
W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki,
Georgio, Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams,
the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fists Dey Junior, Old Ebon,
Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn,
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert
Jessica. No week. Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley
Man George Katis, Valentine Steinman Perras, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali. Mohammadi Perpendicular
Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers, these our web, Jim Frank
Luca Stina, Tom Wig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon,
Benedikt Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John
Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to
my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits
and Rosie. Thank you for all.